Prompts
=======

Prompts are predefined interaction templates provided by the MCP server.
They allow servers to guide the LLM's behavior by suggesting a conversation
structure or specific context for the user. Unlike tools, which are intended
for execution, prompts are intended for context setting and templated
interactions.

In `mcp-cpp-sdk`, prompts are registered with a name, description, and an optional
set of arguments. Clients can discover these prompts and request them with
specific arguments to get a list of messages to include in the conversation.

Registering a Basic Prompt
--------------------------

A basic prompt can be registered using the `add_prompt` method. The simplest
overload takes a name, description, and a set of arguments (as JSON schema)
along with a synchronous handler. This method is ideal for simple use cases
where you don't need full type safety for the handler parameters or result.

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/servers/stdio/server_stdio.cpp
   :language: cpp
   :lines: 125-132
   :dedent: 8

The handler receives a `nlohmann::json` object containing the arguments and
returns a `nlohmann::json` object representing the `GetPromptResult`.

Parameterized Prompts and Arguments
-----------------------------------

For more complex scenarios, you can use the typed `add_prompt` overload which
utilizes the protocol's internal structures. This approach provides better
type safety and allows for more detailed metadata about prompt arguments.

Prompt arguments are defined using the `PromptArgument` struct, where you can
specify whether an argument is required and provide a detailed description.

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/servers/stdio/server_stdio.cpp
   :language: cpp
   :start-after: // Prompt: code_review (parameterized)
   :end-before: boost::asio::io_context io_ctx;
   :dedent: 8

In this example, the `code_review` prompt takes two required arguments: `language`
and `code`. The handler extracts these from the `GetPromptRequestParams` and
constructs a `GetPromptResult`.

Structured Prompt Results
-------------------------

The result of a prompt is a `GetPromptResult` object, which primarily contains
a list of `PromptMessage` objects. Each message has a role (e.g., `user` or
`assistant`) and content.

Roles
~~~~~

Roles are defined by the `mcp::Role` enum. These roles are critical for the
LLM to understand the conversation flow and distinguish between user input and
previous assistant responses.

- `Role::eUser`: Represents messages originating from the user. In most
  cases, prompt results consist primarily of user messages that set the stage
  for the LLM.
- `Role::eAssistant`: Represents messages that were previously generated by
  the assistant. These are useful for providing few-shot examples or
  simulating a continuing conversation.

Content Blocks
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The content of a message is a `ContentBlock`. While the most common type is
`TextContent`, MCP supports other content types like images and resources.

Text Content
^^^^^^^^^^^^

In `mcp-cpp-sdk`, you typically use `TextContent` for prompt responses. This
is the standard way to provide instructions or context to the LLM.

.. code-block:: cpp

   PromptMessage msg;
   msg.role = Role::eUser;
   TextContent text;
   text.text = "Review this code...";
   msg.content = std::move(text);

Image Content
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For multimodal models, you can also include images in your prompts. This is
done by providing base64 encoded image data and its MIME type.

.. code-block:: cpp

   ImageContent image;
   image.data = "base64_encoded_image_data";
   image.mimeType = "image/png";
   msg.content = std::move(image);

Resource Content
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Prompts can also reference resources directly. This allows you to include
dynamic content from your server's resources in the prompt response.

.. code-block:: cpp

   EmbeddedResource resource;
   resource.resource.uri = "mcp://system/config";
   resource.resource.text = "System configuration data...";
   msg.content = std::move(resource);

Advanced Registration
---------------------

The `add_prompt` method is a template that supports various handler signatures,
including asynchronous handlers and handlers that receive a `mcp::Context`.

Async Handlers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Asynchronous handlers are essential for operations that might take time, such
as fetching data from an external database or performing complex computations
before returning the prompt content.

.. code-block:: cpp

   server.add_prompt<GetPromptRequestParams, GetPromptResult>(
       metadata,
       [](GetPromptRequestParams params) -> mcp::Task<GetPromptResult> {
           // Perform async operations here
           co_return result;
       });

Using Context
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Handlers can also receive a `mcp::Context&` as their first argument. This
provides access to logging, progress reporting, and cancellation checks.

.. code-block:: cpp

   server.add_prompt<GetPromptRequestParams, GetPromptResult>(
       metadata,
       [](mcp::Context& ctx, GetPromptRequestParams params) -> mcp::Task<GetPromptResult> {
           ctx.log_info("Generating prompt for " + params.name);
           if (ctx.is_cancelled()) {
               throw std::runtime_error("Request cancelled");
           }
           // ... logic ...
           co_return result;
       });

Prompt List Change Notifications
--------------------------------

If your server's available prompts change dynamically, you should notify
connected clients so they can refresh their cache. Use the
`notify_prompts_list_changed` method:

.. code-block:: cpp

   co_await server.notify_prompts_list_changed();

This sends a `notifications/prompts/list_changed` message to the client,
prompting them to call `prompts/list` again if they need the updated list.

Prompt Capabilities
-------------------

To enable prompts, include them in your server capabilities during initialization.
If the client does not see prompt capabilities, it may not attempt to list or
get prompts.

.. code-block:: cpp

   mcp::ServerCapabilities caps;
   caps.prompts = mcp::ServerCapabilities::PromptsCapability{
       .listChanged = true // Enable list change notifications
   };

   mcp::Server server(info, std::move(caps));

By setting `listChanged` to `true`, you inform the client that your server
is capable of sending notifications when the prompt list changes, allowing for
a more dynamic and responsive integration.
